\chapter{Bootstrapping principles}

In this appendix, we describe general principles of bootstrapping, as
opposed to implementation details.

\section{General restrictions}

We define the \emph{purity} of some object to be a non-negative
integer.  An object of purity $p$ is an instance of a class of purity
$p-1$.  An object of purity $0$ is a \emph{host object}.  An object of
purity $1$ is a is a \emph{bridge object}.  An object of purity $2$ is
an \emph{impure ersatz object}.  An object of purity $3$ or more is a
\emph{pure ersatz object}.  Each \emph{phase} of the bootstrapping
procedure creates objects of one purity.  Currently, bootstrapping
phase $n$ creates objects of purity $p=n-2$.  Phase $n$ puts generic
function objects in environment $E_{n+1}$ and class objects in
environment $E_n$.

Suppose we want to access some part of a generic function metaobject
of purity $p$.  Perhaps we want to add methods to it, or set its
discriminating function.  During bootstrapping, such access must be
done by fully functioning generic functions.  For that reason, we use
functions of purity $p-1$ for such access, and we can assume that when
we need to accomplish such access to a generic function of purity $p$,
then either the accessors of purity $p-1$ are either already fully
functional, or the machinery for making them fully functional is fully
functional, so that we can freely use generic functions of purity
$p-1$ to access a generic function of purity $p$.

In general we would like for the slots of an object of purity $p$ to
contain objects of purity $p$, with the exception of meta-level
information.

For generic function metaobjects, this restriction implies that we
want the methods of a generic function of purity $p$ to be objects of
purity $p$, and we want the method functions of those methods to be
objects of purity $p$.  Idem for the \emph{method combination}, the
\emph{effective method functions}, and the \emph{discriminating
  function}.  It follows that the \emph{generic-function class} and
the \emph{method class} of a generic function of purity $p$ are
objects of purity $p-1$.

For classes, the restriction implies that the slot metaobjects, the
superclasses, the subclasses, etc. of a class of purity $p$ should
also be of purity $p$.

In general, we would like for a function of purity $p$ to call other
functions of purity $p$, but during bootstrapping we can not always
accomplish this restriction.  As a general principle, however, we want
to minimize the exceptions to this rule, because these exceptions
require specific bootstrapping code to be handled correctly.

\section{Object creation}
\label{sec-app-bootstrapping-object-allocation}

An object is created by a call to \texttt{make-instance}.
Suppose we want to create an object of purity $p$.  To do so, we
need to instantiate a class of purity $p-1$.  Instantiating a class
involves calling \texttt{make-instance}, which is a generic
function.  But \texttt{make-instance} must call other functions.  One
such function \texttt{compute-defaulted-initargs} which
computes the \emph{defaulted initialization arguments},
given the class metaobject passed to \texttt{make-instance} and the
initialization arguments passed to it.  The function doing this
computation must inspect the class metaobject in that it must call the
accessor \texttt{class-default-initargs}.  This latter function must
therefore have purity $p-2$ since it takes an argument of purity
$p-1$.  If we assume that \texttt{make-instance} and the function for
computing the defaulted initialization arguments have the same purity,
then \texttt{make-instance} has purity $p-2$ as well.  Now, values of
keyword arguments passed to \texttt{make-instance} may be objects that
will become part of the object being created, in which case, those
values should have the same purity as that object, namely $p$.

Once the defaulted initialization arguments are computed, their
validity must be checked.  This task is accomplished by the function
\texttt{check-initargs-valid}.

Once initialization arguments have been validated,
\texttt{make-instance} calls \texttt{allocate-instance} in order to
create the instance of the class.

Finally, the new instance must be passed to
\texttt{initialize-instance} for initialization.

Object creation is illustrated in \refFig{fig-make-instance}.  As we
can see, \texttt{make-instance} must call functions of two different
purity values.  For that reason, \texttt{make-instance} must be
handled specially during bootstrapping.

Another interesting aspect of \texttt{make-instance} is that, if it is
given a symbol as opposed to a class metaobject, it must call
\texttt{find-class}.  Now \texttt{find-class} is probably an ordinary
function, and it must find a class metaobject of purity $p-1$.  If we
assume that \texttt{find-class} has the same purity as
\texttt{make-instance}, then we have a function of purity $p-2$ that
must find a class metaobject of purity $p-1$.  This information may
determine in which environment we decide to allocate functions and
classes of different purity.

\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-make-instance.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-make-instance}
Object allocation.}
\end{figure}

\section{Checking the validity of initargs to \texttt{make-instance}}

Once the defaulted initialization arguments are computed, their
validity must be checked.  This task is accomplished by the function
\texttt{check-initargs-valid}.  This function call accessors on the
class metaobject.  In addition, it must inspect methods on
\texttt{allocate-instance}, \texttt{make-instance},
\texttt{initialize-instance}, and \texttt{shared-initialize}.
These functions do not all have the same purity.  For that reason, we
do not check the validity of initargs during bootstrapping.

\section{Object initialization}

Once an instance has been created, \texttt{initialize-instance} is
called, and \texttt{initialize-instance} immediately calls
\texttt{shared-initialize}.  During bootstrapping, both these
functions are generic functions.  For that reason, when used to
initialize an object of purity $p$,  They must be defined in
environment $E_{p+2}$.

\section{Processing the \texttt{defclass} macro}

The expansion of the \texttt{defclass} macro results in a call to
\texttt{ensure-class} which is an ordinary function that immediately
calls the generic function \texttt{ensure-class-using-class}.  The
\textit{class} argument to \texttt{ensure-class-using-class} is either
\texttt{nil} if the class does not exist, or the class metaobject to
be reinitialized.  Thus, if the new or the existing class is an object
of purity $p$, then \texttt{ensure-class} and
\texttt{ensure-class-using-class} should be of purity $p-1$.
The AMOP states that the \emph{direct-superclasses} argument to
\texttt{defclass} becomes the value of the
\texttt{:direct-superclasses} argument to \texttt{ensure-class} so
there is no call to \texttt{find-class} involved here.

The most interesting aspect of the \texttt{defclass} macro is the
conversion of a slot specification to a \emph{canonicalized slot
  specification}, and specifically the conversion of the
\texttt{:initform} option to the value of the \texttt{:initfunction}
option.  This conversion is done by \texttt{compile} that takes the
initform wrapped in a \texttt{lambda} expression and turns it into a
function.  So \texttt{compile} in this case, must build a function of
purity $p$ since it is going to become part of a slot-definition
metaobject of that purity.

The \texttt{:metaclass} option to the \texttt{defclass} macro becomes
the value of the \texttt{:metaclass} keyword argument to
\texttt{ensure-class}, so no conversion is involved.

The keyword argument \texttt{:direct-superclasses} passed to
\texttt{ensure-class-using-class} may contain class names or class
metaobjects.  If it contains a class name, it is converted to a class
metaobject.  It must do so by calling \texttt{find-class} or something
similar.  So preferably, \texttt{find-class} has purity $p-1$ as well,
and it must find a class with purity $p$.  This behavior is consistent
with the \texttt{find-class} we encountered in
\refSec{sec-app-bootstrapping-object-allocation}.

The keyword argument \texttt{:metaclass} passed to
\texttt{ensure-class-using-class} may contain a class name or a class
metaobject.  If it contains a class name, it is converted to a class
metaobject.  It must do so by calling \texttt{find-class} or something
similar.  In this case, \texttt{find-class} must find a class with
purity $p-1$ which is in direct conflict with what it must do for the
\texttt{:direct-superclasses} option.  We solve this problem in
\sysname{} by using an indirection called \texttt{find-metaclass} that
does what is needed.

\section{Initialization of class metaobjects}

In \sysname{}, class initialization is accomplished by an
\texttt{:around} method on \texttt{shared-initialize}.  It calls an
ordinary function to accomplish its task.  If the class metaobject to
be initialized has purity $p$, then \texttt{shared-initialize} has
purity $p-1$.

The \texttt{:direct-slots} argument is a list of canonicalized slot
specifications.  Each element is converted to a direct slot definition
metaobject.  This conversion is done in two steps.  First the generic
function \texttt{direct-slot-definition-class} is called, passing the
class metaobject as an argument.  Therefore
\texttt{direct-slot-definition-class} is a generic function of purity
$p-1$, just like \texttt{shared-initialize}.  Second,
\texttt{make-instance} is called with the class returned by
\texttt{direct-slot-definition-class}, and the canonicalized
slot specification.  So, here \texttt{make-instance} is called on a
class of purity $p$.  Therefore \texttt{make-instance} is of purity
$p-1$.

\section{Accessing slots}



\begin{figure}
\begin{center}
\inputfig{fig-slot-boundp-using-class.pdf_t}
\end{center}
\caption{\label{fig-slot-boundp-using-class}
\texttt{slot-boundp-using-class}.}
\end{figure}

